[Music]
it was the image that broke the internet
in April 2019 the subject one that had
managed to evade the paparazzi for as
long as people have theorized about its
existence so Big Foot messy Sasquatch no
that's the same as Bigfoot sorry
no I'm talking about the first photo
ever taken of a black hole I'm sure you
remember the recent hype at least if you
weren't living under a rock it was a
monumental event not only for scientists
but for the public too
people have always been mesmerised in
slightly terrified by the idea of a
black hole but up until recently
black holes had only technically been a
theory well astronomers we're pretty
sure they exist I mean for decades
they've been watching the pull and push
of black holes that influence
neighboring planets and stars they've
even been listening to the powerful
gravitational waves that appear after
supermassive black holes collide whoa
up till now astrophysicists have always
lacked that final proof of their
existence but those days are gone thanks
to an international team of over 200
astronomers that have been working for
years to capture a unique photo of a
black hole they started getting all the
necessary data back in 2017 but it take
a while to put it all together in an
image it's not like they just pointed a
camera told the black hole to say cheese
and snap the photo yeah it's a little
more complicated than that
we can admire this amazing space
phenomenon thanks to a vast global
network of telescopes called the event
horizon telescope collaboration or
simply EHT yeah that's shorter now why
such a name glad you asked
you see the event horizon is the point
of no return on the outskirts of a black
hole when something for example matter
radiation or light reaches this boundary
there's no way for it to escape the
black hole's clutches anyway to capture
the very first image of a black hole
scientists created a sort of mega earth
sized virtual telescope by combining the
power of eight different radio
telescopes spread around our globe the
researchers had to simultaneously point
the telescope's in a meticulously
planned order with the help of precise
atomic clocks set on each of them all in
all the process resembled a carefully
choreographed dance but thanks to these
preparations over two weeks
the telescope's collected a whopping
five thousand terabytes of data that's
five quadrillion bytes 15 zeros if you
want to count them all all that data was
then processed by several supercomputers
and scientists finally got the
long-awaited image what they observed
was a monster of a black hole measuring
about 25 billion miles across just
imagine it'd be like thirty thousand of
our Suns or to really make you feel
itsy-bitsy 40 billion Earth's the size
of this giant might easily be larger
than our entire solar system now let
that sink in
but don't worry this massive black hole
isn't going to engulf our planet or
anything it's somewhere out in the
middle of the supergiant miss here 87
galaxies about 55 million light-years
away from our little floating rock in
space hence why was it so tough to get a
clear image of the thing
well imagine trying to take a picture of
a doughnut left on the moon just by
using your smartphone yeah astronomers
had previously got some images of a
light stream coming from the area
whereas they expected the m87 black hole
could be but they couldn't capture the
hole itself because their equipment at
that time was a far cry from the
perfection that is EHT if you look at
the funny image of the giant hole which
admittedly doesn't look that big in the
photo you'll see a ring of superheated
gas that's being sucked into a
flawlessly circular hole that's the
event horizon I mentioned earlier after
light reaches it it disappears without a
trace but it's thanks to this exact ring
of light which is way brighter than all
the stars of m87 combined that
astronomers here on earth managed to
take the photo the headline making black
hole is a mature one it's just chillin
resting and eating gasps that's
trickling from nearby stars the giant is
dimmer than the other more energetic
black holes those youngsters accumulate
much larger amounts of matter so their
radiant gas whirls shine a lot brighter
but the most exciting thing about this
black hole is that scientists are pretty
sure it's the heaviest they've found so
far probably with a mass 6.5 billion
times that of our Sun man space makes
you feel teeny-tiny doesn't it black
holes are some of the most extreme
objects that exist anywhere in space
they pack incredible amounts of mass in
a single point which makes them
infinitely dense just like my college
roommate
yeah just kidding and when I say
infinitely I mean it as a result such
density creates an enormous
gravitational pull towards the center
that no one and nothing can overcome in
other words black holes are so unique
because they're the only existing
objects surrounded by a region of
space-time that's entirely inaccessible
for the rest of the universe
they also superheat matter to billions
of degrees and make it reach the speed
of light before swallowing anything that
carelessly gets too close to them and
that's where the theories get trippy
some scientists are sure that certain
black holes the ones that spent fast can
create wormholes in space-time did you
catch that like if you jump into a black
hole you could find yourself in a
different time on the other side of the
universe whoo and guess what if
scientists can get more images of black
holes they may be able to confirm or
reject this hypothesis who knows maybe
one day astronomers will get a photo of
a black hole with a wormhole attached to
it and well it sounds like sci-fi stuff
now just remember the mere existence of
black holes was just a theory until
recently so anything's possible and now
to really fill your plate for the day
here are some more cool facts about
black holes there are tiny ones called
primordial black holes they vary from
the size of an atom to that of a
mountain there's a theory that galaxies
get formed around black holes meaning
that when a large star implodes on
itself a black hole appears in its place
and the rest of the galaxy just pops up
around it there's a supermassive black
hole right in the middle of our Milky
Way galaxy
it's called Sagittarius 8 and it's 4
million times as heavy as the Sun and no
we're not going to get sucked into this
Hall it's more than 26,000 light years
away from Earth too far to have any
influence on our planet
besides Sagittarius a there are a
staggering 100 million medium-sized
black holes in our galaxy can you
imagine how many there are in all the
100 billion galaxies that exist out
there yeah you do the math scientists
have found out that there exist black
hole binaries - black holes that orbit
each other now if you ever find yourself
near a black hole you'll notice that
time slows down significantly Hey
more time to tackle that bucket list
just don't let yourself get tugged
behind the event horizon also known as
the point of no return
bye-bye if you manage to squeeze earth
down to the size of a cherry tomato it
would turn into a black hole in fact you
could also become one yourself if you
agreed to be scaled down to the size of
an atom well black holes aren't some
hungry predators that roam the universe
preying on poor unsuspecting planets and
stars they just built down the stuff
that ends up too close to them
they also sometimes fling out spitballs
the size of a planet these things
managed to escape a black hole's immense
gravitational pull by slipping away
before going past the point of no return
in fact with Sagittarius a we should be
worried not about its pull but about
these spit balls coming at us at 20
million miles per hour
the chances are slim though so don't
sweat it
South African astronomers have recently
come across another head-scratching
black hole mystery in a region of
distant space they noticed that several
black holes located in different
galaxies aligned in the same direction
it looks as if their gas emissions have
been synchronized by design hey why
can't we synchronize my gas emissions
anyway
scientists can't explain why and how
these black holes which are about 300
million light years from one another can
be acting in unison hey maybe it's a
cross universe black hole flashmob
mm-hmm so have you heard about any other
cool black hole facts please leave them
down in the comments if you learned
something new today
and give this video a like and share it
with a friend but don't space out just
yet we have over 2,000 cool videos for
you to check out all you have to do is
pick the left or right video click on it
and enjoy stay on the bright side of
life